src/Python/README.rst, before:

Somoclu - Python Interface
================================

Somoclu is a massively parallel implementation of self-organizing maps. It relies on OpenMP for multicore execution, MPI for distributing the workload, and it can be accelerated by CUDA. A sparse kernel is also included, which is useful for training maps on vector spaces generated in text mining processes. The topology of map is either planar or toroid, the grid is rectangular or hexagonal. Currently a subset of the command line version is supported with this Python module.

Key features of the Python interface:

* Fast execution by parallelization: OpenMP and CUDA are supported.
* Multi-platform: Linux, OS X, and Windows are supported.
* Planar and toroid maps.
* Rectangular and hexagonal grids.
* Gaussian or bubble neighborhood functions.
* Visualization of maps, including those that were trained outside of Python.

The documentation is available on `Read the Docs <http://somoclu.readthedocs.org>`_. Further details are found in the following paper:

Peter Wittek, Shi Chao Gao, Ik Soo Lim, Li Zhao (2015). Somoclu: An Efficient Parallel Library for Self-Organizing Maps. `arXiv:1305.1422 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.1422>`_.

Usage
-----
A simple example is below. For more example, please refer to the `documentation <http://somoclu.readthedocs.org>`_ and a more thorough ipython notebook example at `Somoclu in Python.ipynb <http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/peterwittek/ipython-notebooks/blob/master/Somoclu%20in%20Python.ipynb>`_.

::

    import somoclu
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    c1 = np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    c2 = (0.2, 0.5) + np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    c3 = (0.4, 0.1) + np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    data = np.float32(np.concatenate((c1, c2, c3)))
    colors = ["red"] * 50
    colors.extend(["green"] * 50)
    colors.extend(["blue"] * 50)

    labels = list(range(150))
    #labels[2] = None
    #labels[41] = None
    #labels[40] = None
    n_rows, n_columns = 30, 50
    som = somoclu.Somoclu(n_columns, n_rows, data=data, maptype="planar",
                          gridtype="rectangular")
    som.train(epochs=10)
    som.view_umatrix(bestmatches=True, bestmatchcolors=colors, labels=labels)

Installation
------------
The code is available on PyPI, hence it can be installed by

::

    $ sudo pip install somoclu

Some pre-built binaries in the wheel format or windows installer are provided at `PyPI Dowloads <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/somoclu#downloads>`_, they are tested with `Anaconda <https://www.continuum.io/downloads>`_ distributions. If you encounter errors like `ImportError: DLL load failed: The specified module could not be found` when `import somoclu`, you may need to use `Dependency Walker <http://www.dependencywalker.com/>`_ as shown `here <http://stackoverflow.com/a/24704384/1136027>`_ on ``_somoclu_wrap.pyd`` to find out missing DLLs and place them at the write place. Usually right version (32/64bit) of ``vcomp90.dll, msvcp90.dll, msvcr90.dll`` should be put to ``C:\Windows\System32`` or ``C:\Windows\SysWOW64``.

The wheel binaries for OSX are compiled with `clang-omp <http://clang-omp.github.io/>`_ , and depend on libiomp5, which you can install by:

::

    $ brew install libiomp


If you want the latest git version, first git clone the repo, install `swig <http://www.swig.org/>`_ and run:

::

    $ ./autogen.sh
    $ ./configure [options]
    $ make
    $ make python

to generate python interface files.

Then follow the standard procedure for installing Python modules:

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Build on Mac OS X
--------------------
Using GCC
---------------
Since OS X 10.9, gcc is just symlink to clang. To build somoclu and this extension correctly, it is recommended to install gcc using something like:

::

    $ brew install gcc --without-multilib

and set environment using:

::

    export CC=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    export CXX=/usr/local/bin/g++-5
    export CPP=/usr/local/bin/cpp-5
    export LD=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias c++=/usr/local/bin/c++-5
    alias g++=/usr/local/bin/g++-5
    alias gcc=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias cpp=/usr/local/bin/cpp-5
    alias ld=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias cc=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5

Using clang-omp
---------------
To install clang-omp, follow instructions at http://clang-omp.github.io/. And set environment using:

::

    export CC=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    export CXX=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    export CPP=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    export LD=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias c++=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias g++=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias gcc=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias cpp=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias ld=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias cc=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    export PATH=/usr/local/bin/:$PATH
    export C_INCLUDE_PATH=/usr/local/include/:$C_INCLUDE_PATH
    export CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH=/usr/local/include/:$CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH
    export LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib:$LIBRARY_PATH
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

Before building the module manually with:

::

    $ python setup.py build

Build with CUDA support on Linux and OS X:
------------------------------------------
If your CUDA is installed elsewhere than /usr/local/cuda, you cannot directly install the module from PyPI. Please download the `source distribution <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/somoclu>`_ from PyPI. Open the setup.py file in an editor and modify the path to your CUDA installation directory:

::

   cuda_dir = /path/to/cuda

Then run the install command

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Build with CUDA support on Windows:
--------------------------------------
You should first follow the instructions to `build the Windows binary <https://github.com/peterwittek/somoclu>`_ with MPI disabled with the same version Visual Studio as your Python is built with.(Since currently Python is built by VS2008 by default and CUDA v6.5 removed VS2008 support, you may use CUDA 6.0 with VS2008 or find a Python prebuilt with VS2010. And remember to install VS2010 or Windows SDK7.1 to get the option in Platform Toolset if you use VS2013.) Then you should copy the .obj files generated in the release build path to the Python/src folder.

Then modify the win_cuda_dir in setup.py to your CUDA path and run the install command

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Then it should be able to build and install the module.

Commit message:

Configure and setup scripts finalized

src/Python/README.rst, after:

Somoclu - Python Interface
================================

Somoclu is a massively parallel implementation of self-organizing maps. It relies on OpenMP for multicore execution, MPI for distributing the workload, and it can be accelerated by CUDA. A sparse kernel is also included, which is useful for training maps on vector spaces generated in text mining processes. The topology of map is either planar or toroid, the grid is rectangular or hexagonal. Currently a subset of the command line version is supported with this Python module.

Key features of the Python interface:

* Fast execution by parallelization: OpenMP and CUDA are supported.
* Multi-platform: Linux, OS X, and Windows are supported.
* Planar and toroid maps.
* Rectangular and hexagonal grids.
* Gaussian or bubble neighborhood functions.
* Visualization of maps, including those that were trained outside of Python.

The documentation is available on `Read the Docs <http://somoclu.readthedocs.org>`_. Further details are found in the following paper:

Peter Wittek, Shi Chao Gao, Ik Soo Lim, Li Zhao (2015). Somoclu: An Efficient Parallel Library for Self-Organizing Maps. `arXiv:1305.1422 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.1422>`_.

Usage
-----
A simple example is below. For more example, please refer to the `documentation <http://somoclu.readthedocs.org>`_ and a more thorough ipython notebook example at `Somoclu in Python.ipynb <http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/peterwittek/ipython-notebooks/blob/master/Somoclu%20in%20Python.ipynb>`_.

::

    import somoclu
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    c1 = np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    c2 = (0.2, 0.5) + np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    c3 = (0.4, 0.1) + np.random.rand(50, 2)/5
    data = np.float32(np.concatenate((c1, c2, c3)))
    colors = ["red"] * 50
    colors.extend(["green"] * 50)
    colors.extend(["blue"] * 50)

    labels = list(range(150))
    #labels[2] = None
    #labels[41] = None
    #labels[40] = None
    n_rows, n_columns = 30, 50
    som = somoclu.Somoclu(n_columns, n_rows, data=data, maptype="planar",
                          gridtype="rectangular")
    som.train(epochs=10)
    som.view_umatrix(bestmatches=True, bestmatchcolors=colors, labels=labels)

Installation
------------
The code is available on PyPI, hence it can be installed by

::

    $ sudo pip install somoclu

Some pre-built binaries in the wheel format or windows installer are provided at `PyPI Dowloads <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/somoclu#downloads>`_, they are tested with `Anaconda <https://www.continuum.io/downloads>`_ distributions. If you encounter errors like `ImportError: DLL load failed: The specified module could not be found` when `import somoclu`, you may need to use `Dependency Walker <http://www.dependencywalker.com/>`_ as shown `here <http://stackoverflow.com/a/24704384/1136027>`_ on ``_somoclu_wrap.pyd`` to find out missing DLLs and place them at the write place. Usually right version (32/64bit) of ``vcomp90.dll, msvcp90.dll, msvcr90.dll`` should be put to ``C:\Windows\System32`` or ``C:\Windows\SysWOW64``.

The wheel binaries for OSX are compiled with `clang-omp <http://clang-omp.github.io/>`_ , and depend on libiomp5, which you can install by:

::

    $ brew install libiomp


If you want the latest git version, first git clone the repo, install `swig <http://www.swig.org/>`_ and run:

::

    $ ./autogen.sh
    $ ./configure [options]
    $ make
    $ make python

to generate python interface files.

Then follow the standard procedure for installing Python modules:

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Build on Mac OS X
--------------------
Using GCC
---------------
Since OS X 10.9, gcc is just symlink to clang. To build somoclu and this extension correctly, it is recommended to install gcc using something like:

::

    $ brew install gcc --without-multilib

and set environment using:

::

    export CC=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    export CXX=/usr/local/bin/g++-5
    export CPP=/usr/local/bin/cpp-5
    export LD=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias c++=/usr/local/bin/c++-5
    alias g++=/usr/local/bin/g++-5
    alias gcc=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias cpp=/usr/local/bin/cpp-5
    alias ld=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5
    alias cc=/usr/local/bin/gcc-5

Using clang-omp
---------------
To install clang-omp, follow instructions at http://clang-omp.github.io/. And set environment using:

::

    export CC=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    export CXX=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    export CPP=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    export LD=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias c++=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias g++=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias gcc=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias cpp=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp++
    alias ld=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    alias cc=/usr/local/bin/clang-omp
    export PATH=/usr/local/bin/:$PATH
    export C_INCLUDE_PATH=/usr/local/include/:$C_INCLUDE_PATH
    export CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH=/usr/local/include/:$CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH
    export LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib:$LIBRARY_PATH
    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

Before building the module manually with:

::

    $ python setup.py build

Build with CUDA support on Linux and OS X:
------------------------------------------
If the ``CUDAHOME`` variable is set, the usual install command will build and install the library:

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Build with CUDA support on Windows:
--------------------------------------
You should first follow the instructions to `build the Windows binary <https://github.com/peterwittek/somoclu>`_ with MPI disabled with the same version Visual Studio as your Python is built with.(Since currently Python is built by VS2008 by default and CUDA v6.5 removed VS2008 support, you may use CUDA 6.0 with VS2008 or find a Python prebuilt with VS2010. And remember to install VS2010 or Windows SDK7.1 to get the option in Platform Toolset if you use VS2013.) Then you should copy the .obj files generated in the release build path to the Python/src folder.

Then modify the win_cuda_dir in setup.py to your CUDA path and run the install command

::

    $ sudo python setup.py install

Then it should be able to build and install the module.
